Refactor ColPali model documentation (#37309)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/model_doc/colpali.md

rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.
-->

<div style="float: right;">
    <div class="flex flex-wrap space-x-1">
        <img alt="PyTorch" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-DE3412?style=flat&logo=pytorch&logoColor=white">
    </div>
</div>

# ColPali

[ColPali](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01449) is a model designed to retrieve documents by analyzing their visual features. Unlike traditional systems that rely heavily on text extraction and OCR, ColPali treats each page as an image, capturing not just the text but also the layout, tables, charts, and other visual elements. This approach allows it to understand documents more holistically. It leverages Vision Language Models (VLMs) to create detailed embeddings of these page images, enabling efficient and accurate retrieval. By integrating visual and textual data, ColPali offers a more comprehensive understanding of documents, making it particularly effective for complex documents where visual context is crucial.

You can find all Hf-native ColPali checkpoints under the [ColPali](https://huggingface.co/collections/vidore/hf-native-colvision-models-6755d68fc60a8553acaa96f7) collection.

> [!TIP]

> > The orginal ColPali checkpoints are not natively supported by transformers 🤗. To use them you have to install [colpali-engine](https://github.com/illuin-tech/colpali). You can find the original checkpoints [here](https://huggingface.co/collections/vidore/colpali-models-673a5676abddf84949ce3180).

Reviewer: I think we can remove this `[!TIP]` since its not directly related to Transformers

> [!TIP]

> > Click on the ColPali models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to use ColPali for Image Retrieval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Click on the ColPali models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to use ColPali for image retrieval.
```

<hfoptions id="usage">

> <hfoption id="ImageRetrieval">

Reviewer: It would be really nice here if you can use two real example images :)

```py
import torch
from PIL import Image
from transformers import ColPaliForRetrieval, ColPaliProcessor

model = ColPaliForRetrieval.from_pretrained(
    "vidore/colpali-v1.2-hf",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="auto",
).eval()
processor = ColPaliProcessor.from_pretrained("vidore/colpali-v1.2-hf")

images = [
    Image.new("RGB", (32, 32), color="white"),
    Image.new("RGB", (16, 16), color="black"),
]
queries = [
    "What is the organizational structure for our R&D department?",
    "Can you provide a breakdown of last year’s financial performance?",
]

batch_images = processor(images=images).to(model.device)
batch_queries = processor(text=queries).to(model.device)

with torch.no_grad():
    image_embeddings = model(**batch_images).embeddings
    query_embeddings = model(**batch_queries).embeddings

scores = processor.score_retrieval(query_embeddings, image_embeddings)
```

```suggestion
<hfoption id="image retrieval">
```

rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.
-->

<div style="float: right;">
    <div class="flex flex-wrap space-x-1">
        <img alt="PyTorch" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-DE3412?style=flat&logo=pytorch&logoColor=white">
    </div>
</div>

# ColPali

[ColPali](https://huggingface.co/papers/2407.01449) is a model designed to retrieve documents by analyzing their visual features. Unlike traditional systems that rely heavily on text extraction and OCR, ColPali treats each page as an image. It uses [Paligemma-3B](./paligemma) to capture not only text, but also the layout, tables, charts, and other visual elements to create detailed embeddings. This offers a more comprehensive understanding of documents and enables more efficient and accurate retrieval.

You can find all the original ColPali checkpoints under the [ColPali](https://huggingface.co/collections/vidore/hf-native-colvision-models-6755d68fc60a8553acaa96f7) collection.

> [!TIP]
> Click on the ColPali models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to use ColPali for image retrieval.

<hfoptions id="usage">
<hfoption id="image retrieval">

```py

> from io import BytesIO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import requests
import torch
from PIL import Image
from transformers import ColPaliForRetrieval, ColPaliProcessor

# Load model (bfloat16 support is limited; fallback to float32 if needed)
model = ColPaliForRetrieval.from_pretrained(
    "vidore/colpali-v1.2-hf",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16 if torch.cuda.is_available() else torch.float32,
    device_map="auto",  # "cpu", "cuda", or "mps" for Apple Silicon
).eval()

processor = ColPaliProcessor.from_pretrained(model_name)

url1 = "https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/89/US-original-Declaration-1776.jpg"
url2 = "https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Romeoandjuliet1597.jpg/500px-Romeoandjuliet1597.jpg"

def load_image_from_url(url):
    headers = {
        "User-Agent": "Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; PierreBot/1.0; +http://example.com/bot)"
    }
    response = requests.get(url, headers=headers)
    response.raise_for_status()  # Ensure the download was successful
    return Image.open(BytesIO(response.content)).convert("RGB")

> images = [load_image_from_url(url1), load_image_from_url(url2)]

Reviewer: Can make this simpler with (apply same changes to the quantization example below)

```py
images = [
    Image.open(requests.get(url1, stream=True).raw),
    Image.open(requests.get(url2, stream=True).raw),
]
```

# Score the queries against the images
scores = processor.score_retrieval(query_embeddings, image_embeddings)
```
</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

> 

Reviewer: Let's also add a quantization example.

```py
import torch
from PIL import Image
from transformers import ColPaliForRetrieval, ColPaliProcessor, TorchAoConfig

quantization_config = TorchAoConfig("int4_weight_only", group_size=128)
model = ColPaliForRetrieval.from_pretrained(
    "vidore/colpali-v1.2-hf",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    device_map="auto",
).eval()
processor = ColPaliProcessor.from_pretrained("vidore/colpali-v1.2-hf")

images = [
    Image.new("RGB", (32, 32), color="white"),
    Image.new("RGB", (16, 16), color="black"),
]
queries = [
    "What is the organizational structure for our R&D department?",
    "Can you provide a breakdown of last year’s financial performance?",
]

batch_images = processor(images=images).to(model.device)
batch_queries = processor(text=queries).to(model.device)

with torch.no_grad():
    image_embeddings = model(**batch_images).embeddings
    query_embeddings = model(**batch_queries).embeddings

scores = processor.score_retrieval(query_embeddings, image_embeddings)
scores
```

## Notes

> - The scores output by the `score_retrieval` method is a 2D tensor. First dimension is the number of queries and the second dimension is the number of images. The higher the score, the more similar the query and image are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`~ColPaliProcessor.score_retrieval`] returns a 2D tensor where the first dimension is the number of queries and the second dimension is the number of images. A higher score indicates more similarity between the query and image.
```
